---
layout: post
title: "Python Data Structures: Dictionary, A Prelude to MapReduce"
---

Dictionaries are useful for easy access to key:value pairs.

Unlike lists, dictionaries are mutable, mapping objects.

They are hashable; meaning indexed by keys, which point to values. Strings, numbers, and tuples(when immutable) can be used
in the data structure. 

## Creating an empty dictionary object is a simple command:

`dictionaryName = {}`

However, you'll want to do this when utilizing a loop to fill the empty object.

## To explicitly build your object you would approach it as follows:

`dictionaryName = {"Key1":1, "Key2":2, "Key3":3}`

This will create a dictionary containing keys 'Key1, Key2, Key3' and their associated with values of '1, 2, 3'.

Dictionaries are natively unsorted, each time you call the dict, you will get a random output of the key:value pairs.

However, you can use the sorted() command to force an ordering to your output based on values. 

## Sorting by value: 

`dictionaryName = {"Key1":1, "Key2":2, "Key3":3}`

`sortYourList = sorted((key,value) for (key,value) in dictionaryName.items())`

`print(sortYourList)`
 
|[Output]|
|:-----:|
|"[('Key1', 1), ('Key2', 2), ('Key3', 3)]"|

## Iterative access:
So, let's say you want to loop through the contents of your dict to analyze what's present...

Using the general pythonic model of a For Loop, we can expand it as follows:

```python
keyRing = {"Key1":1, "Key2":2, "Key3":3}
print("Key, Value pairs:")
for key, value in keyRing.items():
    print(str(key) + ":" + str(value))
```

|[Output]|
|:---------------:|
|"[Key, Value pairs:"]|
|"Key1:1"|
|"Key2:2"|
|"Key3:3"|

You can still utilize traditional 0 based indexing with a dict, by using the enumerate() method:

## .enumerate() - Gives index position, and its associated KEY, but not value. 

```python
keyRing = {"Key1":1, "Key2":2, "Key3":3}
print("Key, Value pairs:")
for key, value in enumerate(keyRing):
    print(str(key) + ":" + str(value))
```

|[Output]|
|:---------------:|
|[Key, Value pairs:]|
|"0:Key1"|
|"1:Key2"|
|"2:Key3"|


Now, let's say you have two lists, but you want to create a fast, mutable dictionary to reference of the contents
which hold a referential value to each other, or simply view the references. In this case, you could use the zip() method:

## .zip() - Peek at data in k:v pairs, combine using dictionaryName = dict(zip(keys, values))

```python
keys= ['Key1', 'Key2', 'Key3']
doors = [1, 2, 3]
for key, door in zip(keys, doors):
    print(key + ":" + str(door))
```

|[Output]|
|:------:|
|"Key1:1"|
|"Key2:2"|
|"Key3:3"|

## Creating a dict from lists:

`dictionaryName = dict(zip(keys, doors))`

That's your brief tutorial on the Dictionary data structure in Python, it's a useful approach in the right situation.

We'll continue the discussion of common data structures in another post. 
